---
layout: post
title: Bootstrap 5.1.0
video:
date: 2021-06-06
author: mdo
---

The first minor release of Bootstrap 5 is here! v5.1.0 has arrived with some exciting new features and improvements. There's support for CSS Grid, offcanvas in the navbar, new helpers, CSS variables in our utilities, refactored JavaScript, and a ton more.

## CSS Grid

We've added an experimental version of a new CSS Grid as an opt-in alternative to the default grid system. Override our default variables to set `$enable-grid-classes: false` and enable the CSS Grid by setting `$enable-cssgrid: true`. Once recompiled, you'll be able to switch to the new classes. Our new CSS Grid docs page has all the details and some helpful examples to get you started.

Shipping CSS Grid support as experimental allows us to play with things a bit without breaking backward compatibility for folks. Please help us out by testing it and sharing feedback. We expect it to go stable for widespread use in v5.2.0.

## Offcanvas in navbars

We've expanded our `.navbar-expand-*` classes (see what we did there?) to include support for offcanvases inside the navbar. Wrap your navbar elements with the appropriate offcanvas HTML, point your navbar toggler button to the offcanvas, and voila.

[Head to the offcanvas navbar docs]() for more information and a live demo.

## Stack and vertical rule helpers

While utilities get most of the spotlight, helpers are nonetheless incredibly useful in frontend development. Our newest helpers are called stacks and they're shortcuts for vertical and horizontal stacks of elements. They're inspired by the open source [Pylon](https://almonk.github.io/pylon) project, which was in turn inspired by iOS's stacks. Right now, stacks aren't responsive, but that can easily change with your feedback.

To create a vertical stack, wrap a series of elements in `.vstack`. Use `.gap-*` utilities on the parent (or set individual `margin` utilities) to quickly space elements.

```html
<div class="vstack gap-3">
  <div class="bg-light border">First item</div>
  <div class="bg-light border">Second item</div>
  <div class="bg-light border">Third item</div>
</div>
```

Want a horizontal stack? Use `.hstack` instead.

```html
<div class="hstack gap-3">
  <div class="bg-light border">First item</div>
  <div class="bg-light border">Second item</div>
  <div class="bg-light border">Third item</div>
</div>
```

To support these stacks, we've also added a additional new helper—`.vr`, or vertical rule. HTML has had native `<hr>` elements for the longest time to create horizontal rules, but never anything for _vertical_ rules. The new `.vr` helper works great in horizontal stacks and other situations where `border`s are a little trickier.

```html
<div class="hstack gap-3">
  <input class="form-control me-auto" type="text" placeholder="Add your item here...">
  <button type="button" class="btn btn-secondary">Submit</button>
  <div class="vr"></div>
  <button type="button" class="btn btn-outline-danger">Reset</button>
</div>
```

## CSS variables and utilities

We've expanded our `:root` levelt CSS variables to include all our colors, as well as new `RGB` values for our [theme colors](). These new RGB values are built to help us make better use of CSS variables across the entire project. To start, our `background-color` and `color` utilities have been updated to use these new RGB values for real-time customization without recompiling Sass and on-the-fly transparency for any background or text color.

Here's how our `.bg-*` and `.text-*` color utilities look now once compiled:

```css
.bg-success {
  --bs-bg-opacity: 1;
  background-color: rgba(var(--bs-success-rgb), var(--bs-bg-opacity)) !important;
}

.text-primary {
  --bs-text-opacity: 1;
  color: rgba(var(--bs-primary-rgb), var(--bs-text-opacity)) !important;
}
```

We use an RGB version of each color's CSS variable and attached a second CSS variable, `--bs-text-opacity` or `--bs-bg-opacity`, for the alpha transparency (with a default value `1` thanks to a local CSS variable). That means anytime you use `.text-primary` now, your computed `color` value is `rgba(13, 110, 253, 1)`. The local CSS variable inside each `.text-*` class helps avoid inheritance issues when nesting instances of these classes.

We expect this approach to make it's way to `border` utilities next. Have more CSS variables you'd like to see added? Share your thoughts in a new issue on GitHub.

## JavaScript

## Docs



## Get the release

**Head to <https://getbootstrap.com> for the latest.** It's also been pushed to npm:

```sh
npm i bootstrap
```

[Review the GitHub v5.1.0 release changelog](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap/releases/tag/v5.1.0) for a complete list of changes since our last release.

## Support the team

Visit our [Open Collective page](https://opencollective.com/bootstrap) or our [team members](https://github.com/orgs/twbs/people)' GitHub profiles to help support the maintainers contributing to Bootstrap.
